---
layout: post
title: Regular link-irregular graphs
date: 2025-12-13 23:31
---
In two recent works, Akbar Ali, Gary Chartrand, and Ping Zhang conjecture that there is no regular link-irregular graph. Here "regular" means all vertices have equal degrees and "link-irregular" means all vertices induce non-isomorphic neighborhoods. In support of this conjecture, they show that it is true for degrees three and four. However, the probabilistic method shows this to be false for sufficiently high degrees.

The two works are:

* _Irregularity in Graphs_, Springer Briefs in Mathematics, 2021, [doi:10.1007/978-3-030-67993-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-67993-4), Conjecture 2.1, page 25

* "On link-irregular graphs", _Discussiones Mathematicae Graph Theory_ 45 (2025) 95–110, [doi:10.7151/dmgt.2521](https://doi.org/10.7151/dmgt.2521), Conjecture 2.9, p. 106.

I'm pretty sure sufficiently large and high-degree uniformly random regular graphs provide counterexamples but those are difficult to prove things about. Instead I have the following more complicated construction which allows us to preserve enough of the independence of a uniform (non-regular) random graph to make the analysis go through. The short version is that we take two random graphs, and add just enough edges connecting the two to combine them into a single regular graph. The neighborhoods of the vertices in the resulting bicameral graph are so big and sufficiently non-overlapping that any two isomorphic neighborhoods would lead to pairs of disjoint isomorphic induced subgraphs much larger than the ones that can be found in random graphs.

In more detail, choose two uniformly-random <span style="white-space:nowrap">$$n$$-vertex</span> graphs $$G_1$$ <span style="white-space:nowrap">and $$G_2$$.</span> Let $$R$$ be the event that:

* Both $$G_1$$ <span style="white-space:nowrap">and $$G_2$$</span> have equal numbers of edges,

* All vertices of both graphs have degree within $$O(\sqrt{n\log n})$$ <span style="white-space:nowrap">of $$n/2$$,</span> and 

* All pairs of vertices in the same graph have at most $$n/4+O(\sqrt {n\log n})$$ shared neighbors.

The first of these conditions happens with probability <span style="white-space:nowrap">$$\Omega(\tfrac1n)$$,</span> which we are going to consider to be a somewhat large probability. The other two conditions fail with a probability that (by Chernoff bounds) can be made smaller than any chosen polynomial by adjusting the constant in the <span style="white-space:nowrap">$$O$$-notation.</span> This is a small enough failure probability that <span style="white-space:nowrap">condition $$R$$</span> happens with overall probability <span style="white-space:nowrap">$$\Omega(\tfrac1n)$$.</span>

If event $$R$$ happens, then $$G_1$$ <span style="white-space:nowrap">and $$G_2$$</span> have equal numbers of vertices and edges, and would need to be augmented by the same number of incidences to bring all vertex degrees up to equal the maximum degree. Choose a target <span style="white-space:nowrap">degree $$\Delta$$</span> larger than this maximum degree <span style="white-space:nowrap">by $$O(\sqrt {n\log n})$$,</span> so that all vertices have roughly the same number of missing incidences (the difference between $$\Delta$$ and the vertex degree in $$G_1$$ <span style="white-space:nowrap">or $$G_2$$).</span> Think of each of these missing incidences as a "terminal", attached to its vertex. Order the terminals in $$G_1$$ so that each vertex has its terminals consecutive in the ordering, and order the terminals in $$G_2$$ so that each two terminals from the same vertex are $$\Omega(n)$$ positions apart. Pairing up the terminals from $$G_1$$ <span style="white-space:nowrap">and $$G_2$$,</span> in these two orders, gives a (nonrandom) set of edges connecting $$G_1$$ <span style="white-space:nowrap">to $$G_2$$</span> that do not connect the same pair of vertices more than once. <span style="white-space:nowrap">Let $$G_R$$</span> be the <span style="white-space:nowrap">$$\Delta$$-regular</span> supergraph of $$G_1\cup G_2$$ constructed in this way; it has $$O(\sqrt{n\log n})$$ added edges per vertex.

If $$G_R$$ exists and is to have two isomorphic neighborhoods of vertices $$u$$ <span style="white-space:nowrap">and $$v$$,</span> let $$U$$ be any set of $$n/4-O(\sqrt{n\log n})$$ members of $$N(u)\setminus N(v)$$ belonging to the same <span style="white-space:nowrap">subgraph $$G_i$$</span> <span style="white-space:nowrap">as $$u$$,</span> whose images under the isomorphism belong to the same <span style="white-space:nowrap">subgraph $$G_j$$</span> <span style="white-space:nowrap">as $$v$$.</span> Then $$U$$ induces a subgraph isomorphic to some other disjoint induced <span style="white-space:nowrap">subgraph $$G_j[V]$$.</span> We can describe this situation as an instance of the following <span style="white-space:nowrap">event $$I$$:</span>

* There exist two disjoint sets $$U$$ <span style="white-space:nowrap">and $$V$$</span> in $$G_1\cup G_2$$ that have size  $$n/4-O(\sqrt{n\log n})$$ and that induce isomorphic subgraphs <span style="white-space:nowrap">in $$G_1\cup G_2$$.</span>

Now let's analyze the probability of <span style="white-space:nowrap">event $$I$$.</span> We can do this independently of whether event $$R$$ also holds, because the definition of event $$I$$ does not depend on the conditions of <span style="white-space:nowrap">event $$R$$.</span> First, let's count the expected number of isomorphisms between pairs of sets of this size. We can calculate this by multiplying the number of pairs of disjoint sets $$U,V$$ of this size (exponential <span style="white-space:nowrap">in $$n$$),</span> the number of bijections between these sets (exponential <span style="white-space:nowrap">in $$n\log n$$),</span> and the probability that any particular bijection produces an isomorphism (inverse-exponential <span style="white-space:nowrap">in $$n^2$$).</span> By Markov's inequality the probability that there exists even a single large-enough isomorphic pair is at most the same product. For large <span style="white-space:nowrap">enough $$n$$</span> the inverse-exponential-in-quadratic term wins and the probability of <span style="white-space:nowrap">event $$I$$</span> is tiny, also inverse exponential in a quadratic.

By the union bound (applied to the probabilities of <span style="white-space:nowrap">not-$$R$$</span> <span style="white-space:nowrap">and $$I$$),</span> the probability that $$R$$ happens and $$I$$ does not happen is <span style="white-space:nowrap">$$\Omega(\tfrac{1}{n})$$.</span> This gives a lower bound on the more constrained event that $$G_R$$ exists but does not have a pair of vertices with isomorphic neighborhoods (it is link-irregular). Because this probability is positive (for sufficiently <span style="white-space:nowrap">large $$n$$),</span> there exists a possible random choice for which $$G_R$$ exists and is link-irregular. Its existence contradicts the conjecture of Ali, Chartrand, and Zhang. More generally, it shows that the conjecture is false for sufficiently large even numbers of vertices. By adjusting the target <span style="white-space:nowrap">degree $$\Delta$$</span> for an appropriate choice <span style="white-space:nowrap">of $$n$$,</span> the same construction shows that the conjecture is false for all sufficiently large degrees.